 
Dog Breed Classification Using Deep Learning 
 
Akash Varshney
  
Computer Science and Engineering 
Galgotias University 
Greater Noida 
varshneyakash51@gmail.com 
 
Surendra Singh Chauhan 
Computer Science and Engineering 
Galgotias University 
Greater Noida 
surendra.chauhan@galgotiasuniversity.edu.in
Abhay Katiyar 
Computer Science and Engineering 
Galgotias University 
Greater Noida 
abhaykatiyar212@gmail.com 
 
Aman Kumar Singh 
Computer Science and Engineering 
Galgotias University 
Greater Noida 
thakuramansingh1999@gmail.com  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we have proposed two models to 
classify dogs according to their breeds. Since the classification 
of dogs is becoming very difficult and moreover, these 
classifications are taken on the deep learning concept and 
training a fully defined data set helps in training both models 
which predicts the different accuracy levels at both ends. Since 
every now and then predictions are taken for every model. 
During the study, we came across many types of functionality 
levels that were not taken in previous studies too. Also, our 
approach also works on the main concept of transfer learning 
which deals with data augmentation technique with its 
properties to increase the size of data set, after which accuracy 
levels are matched or it is compared with both the models so 
that a comparison can be made for both the models and the 
classification is also done with a profound approach.     
Keywords—
 Deep Leaning, Machine Learning, Dog Breed, 
Classification 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Dog has been a companion for this world and for human 
mankind for the last many years. But now looking around 
and seeing dogs we find that there are many types of dogs 
who look some way or the other way different from each 
other[1]. Also, if we carry forward this, we found that there 
are many different kinds of dogs which are looking a bit 
similar but are of different breeds. These dogs are not only 
different in their breeds but they also differ in many of their 
characteristics such as their behavior towards humans, liking 
and disliking habits of each other, etc. Not only this one of 
the reasons for the classification of dogs according to their 
breed is that now in today’s present time breeding of a dog 
with a different kind of dog has become very usual due to 
which every now and then a new variety of dog breeds are 
found. Since breeding mainly depends upon the matting of 
two species and on the other hand, it also depends upon the 
inner genetics of mother and father due to which matting is 
done and new breeds are produced which is not able to 
identify.  
Recently dogs can be classify using an expert-based 
approach. These are one who has a variety of knowledge of 
different breeds of dogs. Hopefully, this is very difficult as 
experts are not available, and secondly, there is a DNA 
approach. But this DNA approach is expensive and time 
taking as at present time there are a total of 20,580 dogs 
breed present in the world. 
In this paper, we are using an effective approach which is 
known as transfer learning. In this method, we have used 
pre-trained models which are used to classify the dog breeds. 
As a whole, we have worked on two neural networks which 
are Inception V3 and VGG16 which are trained on the 
Stanford Dog dataset and their accuracy is compared. 
 
Fig. 
1. Example of dog breeds 
In the continuation of this research, we have tried to 
evolve as such by making an increase in the accuracy and 
more of such as: - 
1. As compared to all other approaches we are using the 
transfer learning approach using two neural networks which 
are VGG16 and Inception V3,  
2. We have provided an increase in accuracy level of the 
previous model by changing the number of training steps i.e., 
number of epochs and changing batch size in the image data 
generator class where data augmentation is done changing 
the batch size has increased the levels in dataset moreover, 
using rotation_range, width_shift_range,  height_shift_range, 
and all the other properties of data augmentation[2]. 
3. It provides the enhancement in the accuracy level. On 
the other hand, both the model has been taken with the same 
parameters and trained on the same dataset (Stanford dog 
dataset) which helped in comparing their accuracy level of 
both the models. Not only this but while comparing both the 
dataset it was clear that the functional criteria of both the 
models were different.   
2021 International Conference on Intelligent Technologies (CONIT) 
Karnataka, India. June 25-27, 2021
978-1-7281-8583-5/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
1
---PAGE BREAK---
So as this paper begins with the introduction to the dog 
breed classification. It describes all the important aspects and 
the introductory part of the paper. Second section continues 
with the related work means all the work which has been 
done in the past with their pros and cons. Moreover, it 
consists of all the methods which has been implemented and 
it also consists of our proposed model with its basic 
structure. Third section consists of the data set used in the 
model for its training purpose and for the validation use also. 
Fourth section belongs to the data augmentation where the 
augmentation is done using its all properties to make the 
dataset fit for training purpose [ 2]. Fifth and sixth section 
proceeds with the building of the both models used in the 
study i.e., VGG16 and Inception V3. Seventh section deals 
with the result taken out in the both models with their 
accuracy graph and for accuracy vs epoch and loss vs epoch. 
II. RELATED WORK 
From the study it has been found that many approaches 
have been tried or classification of dogs. One of the approach 
is using Local Binary Pattern(LBP) technique[1][3] which is 
used as a face recognition. This algorithm mainly provides 
labels to every pixel of an image using binary numbers. Not 
only this Histogram Oriented Gradient also known as HOG 
algorithm has also been used by making histograms based on 
distribution of directions of gradients[1]. 
PCA based method is also approached on this 
classification by coarse classifier and the fine classifier 
respectively[4]. Fine-grained classification describes its 
importance by differentiating a class from a subclass. Many 
subclasses are formed the classes which are used to 
classification[5]. Some of the classification techniques used 
in literatures were lacking behind in one or other form. Using 
direct Convolutional neural network[5][6] in its basic form is 
also suitable as not every algorithm or technique applied is 
perfect but taking out maximum result from the good 
approach is important. 
In the past studies a most common approach i.e., using 
convolutional neural network as a basic model. In that model 
a feature extraction approach is carried out with the LBP 
images[1] these works as histograms of images and therefore 
these histograms are carried out using feature extraction 
method. 
Since transfer learning is working best for the 
classification and also on the other hand accuracy is the main 
reason for the classification models. So transfer learning is 
used with the two pre-trained neural networks which are 
used to classify dogs according to their breeds [1]. In Fig. 2 
and also in our study we have first carried out the data 
preprocessing of our data set which brings out every detail of 
our data set and moreover, it is best to have every 
information about the data set before we start building 
models for training the data set. After preprocessing, we 
carry forward with data augmentation where the data set is 
provided with datagenerator class with its attributes. After 
this both models are taken with transfer learning and the 
models are trained using the same data set and the accuracy 
is observed. 
As the above study was done there comes out to be some 
pros and cons of some of the researches. The study made by 
Hsu, David[5] it deals with the CNN neural networks which  
work on the architecture of CNN neural networks the 
accuracy which they bring about was 83 which was up to 
their mark, but the CPU machine which they have taken in 
their study takes up to 2 days to train about 1000 iterations, 
and the GPU machine taking about 8 hours to run 100,000 
iterations. 
Along with this study there comes another study that 
works on Grassmann manifold technique[7]. They have used 
landmark labels in their dataset and they also proved the 
performance of their model by keeping the same training and 
testing divisions.  
The next study we come through was with the dog breed 
classification using part localization by Jiongxin Liu[2] . 
They work on a different technique that accurately localizes 
the eyes and the structure of the dog and manages to provide 
a difference in their structure. Their classification algorithm 
mainly focuses entirely on the face of the dog breed. But 
their study found some problems that some of the breeds of 
dogs were named different or the experimental phase of 
some dogs were different. 
 
Fig. 
2. Basic structure of proposed model 
III. DATA SET 
Dataset use for the classification model is Stanford Dog 
dataset which has all types of dog breeds around the world. 
This dataset contains images, annotations and the excel file 
which contains all the dog breed types. Detailing of this data 
set contains: 
 Number of images: 20,50 
 Number of categories:120 
 Annotations: Class labels, Bounding boxes 
This data set is very good as it holds mainly every type of 
image of dogs which provides a high level of accuracy level 
for training the data set and it also consists of 120 categories 
of dogs allowing us to make it a fully prepared dataset for 
our model. While working on this dataset we came across 
many of the different aspects of dogs which we have seen or 
not. 
Data set is approx. 750MB in size with approx. 41.2k 
files in it. 
2
---PAGE BREAK---
  
Fig. 3. Data set images used in training models 
Before building the model, dataset is also preprocessed. 
With the help of preprocessing, we are able to get all the 
information in the dataset. It helped us to know the quality of 
data and on the other hand, it also helped to prevent data 
from redundancy. Preprocessing data set also provides an 
enhancement in both of our models which also plays an 
important role in our study. 
 
Fig. 
4. Data Preprocessing 
 
IV. DATA AUGMENTATION 
The data analysis technique is applied which is used to 
increase the amount of data by adding an average of 
modified copies of already existing dataset or by newly 
originated data set [ 2]. Mainly the purpose of data 
augmentation is to remove overfitting and increasing he 
dataset for the training set. This technique has been 
implemented and the result is in Fig. 4, we can see that 
images are augmented according to the factors which we 
applying in the ImagedataGenerator class. These behaves 
like attributes to this class and helps in making new dataset. 
 
 
Fig. 
5. Data Augmentation 
V. INCEPTION V3 
Inception V3[8] majorly known as image classifier neural 
network is the convolutional neural network and the third 
version of the inception model which was first developed by 
the GoogLeNet model. Since then, it has become a vast 
neural network and attained a good accuracy level in 
accordance to image classification. Some of the 
characteristics of this model includes weights, include_top, 
input_shape, and many more but if we talk about 
classification these are some of the most important 
characteristics for this model Inception v3 is an effective 
neural network as it helps to learn many of the complex and 
difficult features of a model or a data set. On the other hand, 
inception v3 has many filter sizes such as 1*1, 3*3, 5*5 
which can be applied at the same level. done and new breeds 
are produced which is not able to identify [8].  
Moreover, for a pretrained model, the transfer learning[9] 
is carrying out the weights for another model so that the 
accuracy level for the model is increased. In our model, the 
last layers of inception v3 are removed and the deep layers 
are added ending with a dense layer where the weights are 
taken as of ImageNet and the activation function is relu, 
including to which the dense activation function is softmax 
[9]. 
VI. VGG16 
VGG16 is also a convolutional neural network. It is an 
image classification neural network that uses 3*3 filters one 
after the another. As compared to inception the hidden layers 
are less than the inception network. Also, a batch 
normalization layer is added to the VGG16 network[10] not 
only for overfitting but it provides the dataset batches one by 
one while the training period. The main concept of VGG16 
is that it does not use high-level features making it a network 
for easy classification. It provides mainly all types of 
classification models. Fig. 6 shows the different layers in 
VGG16 mainly it comprises of convo 1-1 layers and convo 
1-2 followed by the pooling layers. These convo layers keep 
changing in their instances. As there are dense layers in the 
end the final output is carried by the dense layer which is 
then taken for validation or the accuracy level. 
 
 
Fig. 
6. VGG16 layers 
 
 
3
---PAGE BREAK---
In VGG16 two activation function [9] are used which are 
relu and softmax. The mathematical equation to calculate 
softmax function is: 
          
    
        
Where all symbols represent their own meaning[11], 
  = softmax 
   = input vector 
    = standard exponential function 
  = number of classes in the multi class classifier 
    = exponential function for output vector 
VII. RESULTS 
After the training of both models, it has been observed 
that both the models were trained very successfully and 
provides their individual training accuracy. Also, during the 
training, we have changed the batch size to 12 so that the 
maximum of images can be moved to the training models. 
Moreover, the epochs were also increased to a certain limit 
and it was found that the accuracy was also increasing and 
the production was at its best. 
 
Fig. 
7.  Accuracy and train loss graph for Inception V3 neural network 
 
 
 
Fig. 8. Accuracy graph for VGG16 neural network 
4
---PAGE BREAK---
 
Fig. 9. Loss graph for VGG16 neural network 
 
From Fig. 7 shows the transfer learning performance of 
the Inception V3 neural network. The first graph shows 
relationship between accuracy value and number of epochs 
which contains train accuracy and validation accuracy with 
the maximum accuracy of 85 with epochs equals to 25. 
Similarly, second part of this graph shows the relationship 
between loss value and number of epochs which shows train 
loss and the validation loss in the model. After evaluating the 
graph, it was observed that as the epochs increases the 
accuracy also increases and the loss value decreases. 
Similarly, Fig. 8 and 9 shows graph for VGG16 which 
provides relationship between accuracy v/s epochs and loss 
v/s epochs accuracy observed in this model is 69 with a loss 
of 1.06. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The paper provides comparison between Inception V3 
and VGG16. Since there was also the comparison made 
between the two models it was done based on all the same 
parameters i.e., same number of epoch and same number of 
group size and the training data set was also same. It has 
been observed that Inception V3 provides an accuracy of 85 
and on the other hand VGG16 provides an accuracy of 69 
which is far more less than the Inception V3 model. Since 
the epoch provided to both the model were same and the 
classes were also same. new breeds are produced which is 
not able to identify. Overall a productive comparison has 
been made between both the models. 
After the completion of this study, we came across many 
of the positive results; 
1. As compared between both of the models Inception 
V3 has much higher accuracy then the VGG16. 
2. Train loss as compared is also less in Inception V3 
then VGG16. 
REFERENCE 
[1] P. Borwarnginn, K. Thongkanchorn, S. Kanchanapreechakorn, and 
W. Kusakunniran, “Breakthrough Conventional Based Approach for 
Dog Breed Classification Using CNN with Transfer Learning,” 2019 
11th Int. Conf. Inf. Technol. Electr. Eng. ICITEE 2019 , vol. 7, pp. 1 –
5, 2019, doi: 10.1109/ICITEED.2019.8929955. 
[2] J. Liu, A. Kanazawa, D. Jacobs, and P. Belhumeur, “Dog breed 
classification using part localization,” Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 
(including Subser. Lect. Notes Artif. Intell. Lect. Note s 
Bioinformatics), vol. 7572 LNCS, no. PART 1, pp. 172 –185, 2012, 
doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-33718-5_13. 
[3] P. N. Belhumeur, D. W. Jacobs, D. J. Kriegman, and N. Kumar, 
“Localizing parts of faces using a consensus of exemplars,” Proc. 
IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. , pp. 545 –
552, 2011, doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2011.5995602. 
[4] M. Chanvichitkul, P. Kumhom, and K. Chamnongthai, “Face 
recognition based dog breed classification using coarse- to-fine 
concept and PCA,” 2007 Asia-Pacific Conf. Commun. APCC, pp. 25–
29, 2007, doi: 10.1109/APCC.2007.4433495. 
[5] D. Hsu, Stanford University “Using Convolutional Neural Networks 
to Classify Dog Breeds,” pp. 1–6, 2015. 
[6] Jesse Candido Standford University,"Dog Breed Classification and 
Visualization", CS230, Deep Learning. 
[7]  “Xiaolong Wang , Vincent Ly , Scott Sorensen and Chandra 
Kambhamettu Video / Image Modeling and Synthesis Laboratory , 
Department of Computer and Information Sciences , University of 
Delaware , Newark , DE,” Int. Conf. Image Process. , pp. 5237–5241, 
2014. 
[8] B. A. M. Ashqar and S. S. Abu- Naser, “Identifying Images of 
Invasive Hydrangea Using Pre-Trained Deep Convolutional Neural 
Networks,” Int. J. Control Autom. , vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 15 –28, 2019, 
doi: 10.33832/ijca.2019.12.4.02. 
[9] J. Ngiam, D. Peng, V. Vasudevan, S. Kornblith, Q. V. Le, and R. 
Pang, “Domain adaptive transfer learning with specialist models,” 
arXiv, 2018. 
[10] K. Gopalakrishnan, S. K. Khaitan, A. Choudhary, and A. Agrawal, 
“Deep Convolutional Neural Networks with tra nsfer learning for 
computer vision-based data- driven pavement distress detection,” 
Constr. Build. Mater. , vol. 157, no. September, pp. 322 –330, 2017, 
doi: 10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2017.09.110. 
[11] M. Wang, S. Lu, D. Zhu, J. Lin, and Z. Wang, “A High -Speed and 
Low-Complexity Architecture for Softmax Function in Deep 
Learning,” 2018 IEEE Asia Pacific Conf. Circuits Syst. APCCAS 
2018, pp. 223–226, 2019, doi: 10.1109/APCCAS.2018.8605654. 
 
5
---PAGE BREAK---
